Hello everyone in this lesson we will learn about widgets.
The natural question here is what in the world is a widget.
Well here we are on the home page of my web site and I can tell you that this right hand side bar is
comprised or made up of widgets.
So for example this search section where visitors can search for certain content on my website.
This is a search widget.
This recent post area or section is a recent posts widget.
Scroll down a bit.
This recent comments area is a widget is archive's area is a widget.
You get the idea.
Now the nice thing about widgets is that we can drag and drop and reorder them and customize them.
So for example maybe I want this recent posts widget to sit above the search widget or maybe I want
to remove one of the widgets entirely or add a new widget.
You get the idea and wordpress makes it very simple to manage our widgets.
So check this out.
If we jump over to our admin dashboard and in the sidebar if we look under the appearance pop out menu
we can then click on widgets.
All right now from this screen the first thing I want to draw your attention to is this area.
This box that is labeled sidebar.
So all of these items correspond with the widgets that live in our web sites sidebar area.
So for example if I open up the front end of my web site again remember that the search widget came
first and then the recent posts widget.
But if I want the recent post widget to be on top and come first within this widget screen I can just
click and drag recent posts to sit up at the top and if I go and refreshed my website that change took
effect lets try another example.
So maybe I want to remove this recent comments widget from my sidebar altogether.
So back in my widget screen here is recent comments.
So if I click on that this menu area appears and now I can just click on this delete link and if I switch
back to my front facing web site Cure's recent comments.
But as soon as a refresh the page you can see that it's gone.
Perfect.
Now let's try something new.
So maybe for this recent posts widget area maybe instead of recent posts I want to rename it to latest
posts.
So back in my admin dashboard within my widget screen here is that recent posts widget or section.
So if I click on it we see that there is a title field and I can type whatever I want here.
So I will say the latest entries.
But obviously you could type whatever you want and then just click this blue save button ok and now
as soon as we go back to the front facing website and refresh.
Here we see that change.
All right now let's jump back to our admin dashboard because you might be wondering what this half of
the screen is.
This area is titled available widgets so we can choose from any of these widgets and if we see one that
we like we can just drag and drop it into our Sidebar area.
So for example this calendar widget sounds interesting.
So if I click on it and then drag it over to my side bar area that placed it here but maybe I want to
be the first widget in my sidebar so I can just click and drag it to move it up to the top.
And now if I jump back to my front facing website and refresh at the very top of my sidebar is this
neat calendar.
Now I haven't been creating very many new blog posts on this website but on the days where you have
created a post it will light up so the tent is lit up because I posted on the tent and if I click on
that it takes me to an archive for just that day February 10.
So on that day I created Greek salad and homemade french bread you get the idea.
So this counter widget is pretty neat.
Let's jump back to my admin dashboard and let's practice adding another widget to the sidebar.
So again this area contains all of the widgets that I can choose from but these widgets won't actually
be created and added to my website until I add them into this sidebar area so I can choose from any
of these.
I will try out this text widget so if I just click and drag the text box into the sidebar area it gives
me a few fields to fill out so title and content this text widget is pretty nice because it's very flexible
so the text widget doesn't do anything on its own or automatically.
It just gives us a blank canvas or a blank area where we can type so I can give this a title of hello
world.
And for the Continent I will say this is a bit of sample text.
Thanks for reading.
Okay and now I will just click this blue save button and if I jump back to my front facing website and
refresh here is that text widget.
All right.
Next I want to change gears a bit and I want to let you know that widgets are not limited to just your
sidebar or just this side column.
So check this out.
If we jump back to the admin dashboard Here's the sidebar widget area that we've been customizing but
you will notice that I also have content bottom one and content bottom two.
Now every theme is different.
So I'm using the 2016 theme and it has widget areas named sidebar content bottom one content bottom
two.
But if you're using a different theme it will likely have different widget area names but the same concepts
apply.
So check this out.
If I click on this content bottom one again yours might be named something different if you're using
a different theme.
But once I click on it now I can drag widgets into this area.
So for example let me drag another text widget into this content bottom one area and for the title I
will say testing the text widget again and for the content I will just say hello world one to three.
The sky is blue.
All right now if I click save and then jump back to my front facing web site and refresh and scroll
down to the very bottom here we see that new widget.
Now again every theme is different but in my theme content bottom one corresponds with this bottom area
of my theme.
Let's try it out a widget to this content bottom to area so I will click on it.
And even though I already have a search widget in my sidebar Why don't I just experiment and click and
drag search into content.
Bottom two the idea here is that you can experiment with any of the widgets so feel free to drag and
drop any widgets into any of your widget areas.
But once I click save and then refresh my website here we see it.
So within this particular theme of 2016 this area is content bottom one and just a moment ago it was
taking up this full width.
But as soon as we added the widget to the content bottom to area now they sit side by side each taking
up half of this available with.
So feel free to experiment with different themes.
This theme I'm using has three widget areas or different areas in the page layout that I can customize
with widgets but some themes might have four or five or 10 widget areas.
Other themes might only have one sidebar widget area.
Now remember there are thousands of free themes to choose from.
So it's up to you to experiment and find the right thing for you.
It has enough widget flexibility to meet your needs just to give you a real world example.
Other themes might have a widget area named header and maybe you could add widgets appear in the header
so you get the idea.
Every theme is different and everything has different widget areas but the key point is that anywhere
there is a widget area you have complete control over it.
Now let's change gears a little bit and jump back to the ad then dashboard because there's one last
super important feature when it comes to widgets that I want to let you know about.
So we are not limited to just these widgets that we see right here under the available widgets area.
While it is true that these are the only available widgets that WordPress ships with out of the box
remember there is a little thing called plug ins.
We can search for and download and install new plug ins that will give us access to new widgets that
we can drag and drop into our widget areas.
So lets try that right now.
First let's give ourselves an example goal or task.
So within my sidebar widget area here we can see that we currently have a widget named categories that
we are using.
And if we jump over to my Web site here is that category's widget and we can see that all it does is
list out all of the categories on my website.
So lets give ourselves a goal let's remove this categories widget and replace it with an area titled
latest recipe posts or newest recipes.
Right so I want a widget that can display maybe the most recent two or three or five blog posts from
a particular category.
In this case maybe I want to display the most recent posts from the recipe's category.
Now the default built in wordpress categories which it cannot do that for us.
So lets go ahead and delete this categories widget from my side bar so I will click on it and then click
delete.
And now what we are going to need to do is download and install a plugin that can offer us that type
of functionality.
The ability to display the most recent posts from a certain category in a widget so I know that I need
to search for and install a new plugin.
So in my left hand side bar here we see plugins.
Lets go ahead and click on that from this main plugin screen.
Let's click on this add new button and then within this top right search field.
Let's search for category posts.
Now you are free to choose your own plugin but I know from personal experience that this first one is
a great solution so it's named category posts widget.
It's by Tip-Top press.
And as of this moment it has about eighty thousand or more active installs.
I want to use this plugin so I will click this install now button.
Once the install completes we can then click this blue activate button.
All right.
Looking good we see this plug in activated message here.
So now if we jump back to our widgets screen so in the left hand side bar hover over appearance and
then the pop up menu click on widgets and thanks to that new plug in we just installed.
Now with this available widgets area we have this brand new category posts widget that we can use.
So let's click and drag this into our Sidebar widget area.
And every widget is different but I'm assuming we can just click on these different fields to customize
the widget.
So if we click on this first one named title let's give it a title of latest recipes.
All right let's click on this next field named filter.
So for category let's choose only the recipes category.
Number of posts to show.
Let's set it from 10 down to 5 so it will only show the five most recent recipes.
And it looks like there are several other options we could customize but I don't think we need to at
this moment so I'm just going to scroll down and click the blue save button and now if I jump back to
my front facing web site and refresh and scroll up a bit here we see that new widget latest recipe is
perfect.
Now there's only three instead of five.
And that's because I only have three posts under the recipes category but obviously if I had more to
plug in would limit it to the most recent five.
And now our visitors can just click on any one of these to be taken to that post.
All right let's change gears again and try a new example let's give ourselves a new goal.
So let's imagine we want to add a widget to our sidebar that displays icons or links to all of the social
media networks that we belong to.
So Facebook Twitter Pinterest YouTube you get the idea.
WordPress does not come with a widget like that out of the box but we can go search for and install
a new plug in to get the job done.
So let's jump over to our admin dashboard.
We are going to need a new plug in.
So in the left hand side bar click on plug ins.
From this main plug in screen click the Add New button within this top right search field.
Let's search for simple social icons.
All right now you might be wondering how in the world you're supposed to know what to search for because
in the real world there won't always be someone in a video telling you exactly what to search for well
over time you will become familiar with different plug ins that you've used again and again and you
know that their quality solutions.
But in the beginning when you're just starting out you're going to want to rely on word of mouth and
oftentimes just googling for best WordPress plugin for and then include a few keywords of what you're
trying to achieve.
So in the past I personally had googled for best WordPress plugin for social icon widget or something
along those lines.
Anyways I just know through my own research that this simple social icons is a quality solution.
We can see that it has over 200000 active installs.
So let's use it let's click this install now button once the installation completes we can then click
this blue activate button.
And now let's jump back to our widget screen to the side bar hover over appearance and then the pop
up menu we can click on widgets.
And thanks to the plug in that we just installed now within our available widgets area down here we
see simple social icons.
So let's just click and drag that into our Sidebar.
We could give it a title like follow me or get social or something cheesy along those lines but I think
we could actually just leave that field blank.
I don't think we need to label this area so you can obviously customize the size of the icons and the
color of the icons.
But more importantly if we scroll down you can see there are fields for practically every social media
network there is.
So the first big one that I see is Facebook.
So it's up to you to go find your Facebook business page or fan page or company page or even use your
personal page and copy and paste the link to it into this field.
But I'm just going to paste my personal business or fan page you around.
All right.
Now you might have all of these different accounts flicker get her Google Instagram linked in but I
know that the big other one that I want to use is Twitter and also YouTube.
So let's scroll down they are in alphabetical order.
So here I see Twitter.
I will paste in my Twitter you Arel and then down here I see YouTube so I will paste in my youtube you
are now perfect.
And then I will just click this blue save button and if I switch back to my public front facing website
and refresh.
Cool.
So now visitors of my web site can check out any of my social media accounts through these easy to access
links.
Now this lesson is almost complete.
Let's do a quick review.
And then there's one final widget related thing that I want to show you.
So back in our admin dashboard to review each theme has different widget areas sidebar content bottom
one content bottom two if you're using a different theme you might have a heavier widget area or food
or widget area or any other name.
But the idea is that WordPress shows us all of our available widgets and then we just click and drag
them into the widget area that we want.
We also learned that if WordPress doesn't come with the widget that we want there's no need to worry
because there are thousands of plugins that we can search through.
And odds are that someone has already created a plugin that will give us access to a new widget here
that will allow us to achieve exactly what we are trying to set up.
OK so that was the review.
Now before we bring this lesson to a close there is one final thing I want to show you now widgets are
great and sidebars can be great but you might have noticed a recent trend in web design where a lot
of Web sites don't have a side bar side column.
A lot of modern web sites only have the main column of content.
So if you're like me you might want to remove the side column entirely so your Web site feels more minimalist
and focused and clean and you just have your actual content.
Now not every theme but a lot of themes are pretty flexible and all you need to do to get rid of the
sidebar call them is simply delete any and all widgets that you have in that widget area.
So I might do a time lapse and fast forward over this because I don't want to bore you to tears but
if I just go through all of these widgets and click delete for each one so that my sidebar area is completely
empty.
OK so now that my sidebar widget area is completely empty if I jump back to my front facing web site
and refresh my theme the 2016 theme is smart enough to just not display a side call them.
Now again every theme is different so your theme might not do this but odds are pretty good that your
theme is flexible enough to handle this for you.
Anyways I encourage you to just jump in to your widget screen and begin experimenting.
Experimenting is always the best way to learn and that's actually going to bring this lesson to a close
in our next lesson we will finally begin building our Contact Us page.
It should be a ton of fun.
Let's keep rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.